DEPARTMENT OF BIOSCIENCE & BIOENGINEERING (BSBE)
Welcome to the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering
The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2009 offers a B.Tech. program in Bioengineering, an M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree programs in Bioscience & Bioengineering. Our programs are uniquely designed to inspire innovations in biotechnology, engineering, and medicine from an understanding of  biological systems.  This capacity building is assuming importance in the present times for providing solutions to societal problems in trans-disciplinary frameworks. A major focus is on neurosciences and neurodegenerative disorders, mechanistic biology, environmental and medical microbiology, computational biology, precision health, and bioprospecting for novel molecules and bio-actives from natural resources of the Thar ecoregion. We also offer a competitive Ph.D. program to inculcate scientific temper, independent thinking, and skillsets for scientific entrepreneurship. We encourage and provide avenues for the participation of bioengineering graduates with diverse engineering disciplines to develop technologies for:

Affordable and Smart Healthcare
Clean Environment
Precision Medicine and Health
Sustainable and Affordable Energy
Faculties at the department with wide-ranging expertise,  conduct fundamental and translational research in focus areas that are contemporary and aligned to major sustainable development goals. We are passionate about research and actively communicate our science through regular outreach programs.
VIision:
To excel in developing bioengineering solutions for healthcare, food, energy & environment, through
multidisciplinary research and teaching/learning ecosystem.
Mission
Curriculum and Pedagogy: Generation of competent human resources capable of addressing the fast–
evolving challenges in the domain of bioscience and bioengineering pertinent to human life by implementing a
future centric, broad-based curriculum design based on technology foresight and trans-disciplinary academic
collaborations.
Research: To conduct high quality basic and translational research with primary focus in the areas of healthcare,
food, energy, and environment aiming to seek technological solutions for societal needs.
Innovation: Build an innovation ecosystem by promoting original and creative ideas from faculty & students for
the development of sustainable bioengineering solutions in identified thrust areas. Revenue generation and
Infrastructure: To excel in application-oriented research domains such as drug design, biosensors,
molecular modelling and simulation, protein engineering, tissue engineering and genetically engineered
microbes by leveraging academic and industrial fraternities for revenue generation and strengthening infrastructure.
New Laboratory Facilities:
1. Image enabled Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACs)
facility: The recently established FACS facility enables different
cellular parameters analyses along with cell sorting. This facility
allow validating the cells being sorted by providing a virtual
image expressing unique combinations of molecular markers.
2. Animal House Facility: Our faculty members have contributed to
the establishment and functionalization of a modern animal
house, which would enable testing novel drugs, tissue implants,
medical devices, food and nutraceutical testing, material testing,
and any other customized experiments
3. Plant Functional Genomics Facility: a repository of 300
Arabidopsis thaliana worldwide ecotypes and over 200 knockout
lines established, enabling research on abiotic stress tolerance
genes.
4. Next Generation sequencing Core Facility: Illumina Nextseq 2000
and Seqstudio 8 Flex platforms installed and fully functional at
TISC. This facility will enable genomic and transcriptomic
sequencing for precision medicine.
different
facility
virtual
to
animal
implants,
testing,
300
knockout
tolerance
2000
at
Events Organized:
1. The five day intensive workshop “Ayurtech for precision Tech” was conducted for MD Ayurveda graduates
by BSBE Faculties in collaboration with national council. It aimed to advance Ayurtech Training, develop
research protocols, and integrate AI and genomics for personlised Ayurveda, fostering a Tech driven,
evidence based future in integrative medicine.
2. The Three day molecular motors, transport, and tracks (M2T2-2025) conference 17 -19 February 2025,
organized by Dr. Priyanka Singh at IIT Jodhpur brought together researchers, clinicians and Industry leaders
took explore cutting edge advances in molecular motors and membrane, trafficking.
3. Two weeks hands-on course on Antibiotic Discovery from Soil bacteria coordinated by the Dr. Shankar
Monoharan to combat anti-microbial resistance.
4. Three days hands-on workshop on spectral flow cytometry and image enabled cell sorting.
23
Outreach Programs:
BSBE has engaged in various outreach programs which includes:
• The five day intensive workshop “Ayurtech for precision Tech” was conducted for MD Ayurveda
graduates by BSBE Faculties in collaboration with national council. It aimed to advance Ayurtech
Training, develop research protocols, and integrate AI and genomics for personlised Ayurveda, fostering a
Tech driven, evidence based future in integrative medicine.
• The Three day molecular motors, transport, and tracks (M2T2-2025) conference 17 -19 February 2025,
organized by Dr. Priyanka Singh at IIT Jodhpur brought together researchers, clinicians and Industry
leaders took explore cutting edge advances in molecular motors and membrane, trafficking.
• Two weeks hands-on course on Antibiotic Discovery from Soil bacteria coordinated by the Dr.
Shankar Monoharan to combat anti-microbial resistance.
• New citizens science program called IITJ-BIOBLITZ was initiated by the Team members of Thar
DESIGNS together with JCKIC and IIT Jodhpur.
• We conducted series of talks and seminars from eminent speakers about animal cell culture,
computational biology, molecular diagnostics & therapeutics.
• Further we organized workshop in rural areas, scientific awareness, initiatives in schools and
collaboration with leading institutions.



Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+ 
Vision & Mission of the Department
To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.   

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.

In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:

Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
One year Engineering Innovation opportunity


Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.

The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.

Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.



Welcome to Department of Chemistry & Head's Message
A warm welcome to the Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, which was established in 2015. Since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. Our department offers a variety of academic programs including M.Sc. (2 Years), M.Sc. (Chemistry)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) with Specialization, BS in Chemistry with Specialization (4 years), and Ph.D. programs. We also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate B.Tech. engineering students. The department offers Chemistry courses for 4-year Integrated B.Sc.-B.Ed. Program (ITEP), which is in alignment with NEP 2020 to support teacher preparation and foster professional development.

Besides teaching, the Department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. Our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. We have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. Our current faculty strength is 19 and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. The cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. In short IIT Jodhpur Chemistry department is where Chemistry meets Technology through Collaboration, Communication and Cooperation. I encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at IIT Jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. Thank you.


Welcome to the Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
logo
The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales – from an individual to the community level. Consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. The Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, IIT Jodhpur  esatablished in January 2020. We started academics programs in the academic year 2020-2021. The department offers unique programs that incorporate and integrate the elements of conventional civil engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber-physical-systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains.

The focus areas of the department are :

Energy and Environment
Building Sciences, Safety, and Services
Applications of AI, IoT and CPS in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
Smart and Integrated Infrastructure
Urban Architecture and Planning
Construction Technology and Management
Transportation Engineering
Structural Engineering
Geotechnical Engineering
Water resources Engineering
Engineering Geology
Vision
"The Department strives to be an internationally renowned centre of excellence in education, research, and innovation with a major focus on sustainability and digitalization of infrastructure."

Missions
Develop unique courses in the field of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering through advanced UG and PG programs with a multidisciplinary perspective.
Establish high quality teaching and research facilities in the areas of smart, resilient, and sustainable infrastructure engineering to foster the needs of society.
Promote consilient research through application of AI/ML, cyber-physical-systems, digital twin and advanced visualization in the areas of Energy, Environment, Transportation, and Construction.
Promote innovative and entrepreneurial activities through intellectual property generation and transfer.
Nurture the potential of students to become future leaders in the Civil Engineering industry for leadership achievements, scientific breakthroughs and social welfare.



Welcome to the Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. The department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. Our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and R&D for solving problems of national interest.

Vision
To be among the top 10 departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of Computer Science and Engineering in the country in the next 3 years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next 5 years. Some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.



Mission
Our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.

(M1) Achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subjects for innovative discoveries.
(M2) Develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. The collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc.
(M3) Develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.
(M4) Embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional Computer Science teaching and learning. Be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid CSE education.
(M5) Define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants/ consultancies, and collaborative projects. Develop Start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at IIT Jodhpur.
(M6) Dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation.
(M7) Provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society.



Welcome to the Department of Electrical Engineering
The Department of Electrical Engineering primarily focuses on imparting quality education and preparing students to face future technological challenges. The vision of the Department is to enhance the research environment and to innovate in pedagogy to address the challenges of socio-economic and human resource development.

The Department is committed to engage in high-quality research by Faculty Members and Students, and in the pursuit of excellence in teaching. The Department offers B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering with broad range of major and minor specializations and three state-of-the-art M.Tech. programs in Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT), Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), and Intelligent Communication Systems (ICS).

The Department also runs dual degree (M.Tech. + Ph.D.) programs in Intelligent Communication Systems, Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT) and Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) as well as Ph.D. program with a broad range of specializations covering detailed aspects of Microelectronics, Signal Processing, Communication, Microwave & Photonics, Power systems, Control systems etc. The Department is also starting a new Executive MTech Program in Intelligent VLSI Systems (for working professionals) from July 2022.

The prospective undergraduate and postgraduate students are encouraged to visit the Academic Programs (UG Program, PG Programs and Doctoral Programs) page of the Department to know more about the details of courses offered in the department.

To know more about the current research themes of the faculty members, the prospective students are encouraged to visit the Research Overview page of the Department. Technology Tracks currently pursued by the Department include emerging and challenging fields that culminate at the intersection of several traditional research areas.



Welcome to the Department of Mathematics
Mathematics, being the basis of many disciplines, is a subject that evolves with time and creates new theories to solve real-world challenging problems. Our department has been taking a leading role in developing new methods to model such situations that can be used in diverse areas of computer science, engineering, and basic sciences. The department has faculty with research interests in the areas of Algebra, Mathematical Physics, Scientific Computation, Numerical Analysis, Partial Differential Equations, Topological Dynamics, Low Dimensional Chaos, Dynamical Systems, Renormalization in Low-dimensional dynamics, Wavelet Analysis, Fractional Transform Theory, Image Processing, Financial Risk Analysis, Categorical Data Analysis, Reliability Theory, Applied Probability.

We are excited to offer high-quality programs at postgraduate level for students who wish to apply math to science or engineering such as a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences. We also offer an M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree program in Data and Computational Sciences and a Ph.D. Program with specialization in different areas of Mathematics to those who wish to earn a deeper understanding of pure and applied Mathematics.


Welcome to the Department of Mechanical Engineering
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is devoted to quality engineering education and pursuits the excellence in research. It is dedicated to preparing students to face the emerging challenges faced by society. The vision of the Department is to translate its research and to innovate in pedagogy to enable ignited young minds to find technological solutions for upcoming challenges. The Department offers B. Tech. M. Tech. and Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering within three major domains of Thermofluids, Design, and Smart Manufacturing. The students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of things (IoT), Smart Healthcare, and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).

At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are educated in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of the current activities of the Department. Faculty members are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, nanomaterials, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermo-fluids, fluid-structure interaction, etc. to name a few. Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, Smart scientific computing techniques, high-performance computing, applications of artificial intelligence, machine learning algorithms, sensors, and IoT as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring mechanical engineering know-how. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the Department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills.

The department has active collaborations with AIIMS Jodhpur, General Electric, Thermax, DRDO, ISRO, TCS Innovation Lab, TVS Motor Company to name a few. The department has been attracting various sponsored projects from R&D organizations since its inception.


Welcome To The Department of Materials Engineering
The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur was established in 2017, and the Department is committed to high-quality education and research in the broad area of Materials Engineering. The Department continuously strives for excellence in teaching and research through innovative pedagogy and curriculum, by undertaking interdisciplinary projects, and through active collaborations with industries, R&D labs, and academia. By enabling the students to think independently and equipping them with relevant skill sets, our goal is to encourage the graduates to innovate and address present-day materials challenges to meet the needs of the country.

At present, the Department offers B.Tech., M.Tech., and Ph.D. programs. The Department's teaching and research activities cover four major streams- structural materials, functional materials, computational materials engineering, and process metallurgy. From structural materials to semiconductors, we attempt to understand the processing, composition and structure, properties, and performance of materials for deriving novel, effective, and sustainable alternatives. Currently, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts such as smart materials, additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence and machine learning, sensor materials, etc., as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring Materials Engineering knowledge.
Head of the Department
The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is working towards building future generation minds rich in skills and innovation to be the best in the outside world. Faculty Members in the department have expertise in diverse areas of Materials Engineering. They are actively involved in conducting translational research in the fundamental and applied areas of Materials Engineering. The department frequently organizes invited lectures and workshops to share research findings, train students on the state-of-the-art experimental and computational techniques to promote the development of skill sets.

The Department welcomes bright people who aspire to utilize the power of ambitious research and teaching to shape a better future.

Materials Design and Processing
Advanced Structural and Functional Materials
Computational Materials Engineering
Extractive and Process Metallurgy
Materials Testing and Characterization

Welcome To The Department of Physics
The subject of Physics is inherently a natural science subject based on strong theoretical foundations and experimental findings. The subject closely intersects with almost all the branches of engineering and the current research activities of physics across the world made a huge impact on new, advanced, and emerging technologies. Keeping these facts into consideration, our Department is committed to imparting high-quality education based on a strong academic curriculum comprising elements of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and most importantly hands-on experiments. The graduates of the Department are expected to have deep insight into the domain of Physics together with a strong bent of mind to pursue cutting-edge research and translate it into technology.

We offer a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. Our 4 Year BS in Physics with specialization is a technology-oriented science program and offers specialization in physics-based emerging technology domains. The program also has the flexibility to convert into a 5 Year BS + M.Tech. dual degree course. At the postgraduate level, we have four-degree programs viz. M.Sc. (2 years), M.Sc.-M.Tech Dual Degree in Physics and Materials Engineering. The dual degree program also has additional two specializations namely Functional Materials and Computational Materials Engineering. Finally, our Ph.D. program empowers scholars to pursue research in various domains.

Research Areas
The department has a very good blend of highly qualified young and experienced faculty members in the areas of advanced physics. The department is also equipped with a number of thematic laboratories which enable the students to carry out high-end and impactful theoretical and applied research in the following focus areas:
Infrastructure
The department is equipped with high-end research equipment which includes SQUID magnetometer, Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS), Raman Spectrometer, and Scanning Tunnelling Microscope (STM) besides a host of other advanced characterization equipment which is available at the Centre for Research & Development of Scientific Instruments (CRDSI).

Collaborations
The department is having close collaboration with a number of National and International agencies including DRDO, ISRO, DAE, CSIR, DST, and SERB. Department Faculties also have collaborations with various Institutes of National and International repute, namely TIFR, IIT Bombay, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT BHU, Central University of Rajasthan, University of Montreal, Canada, University of Warsaw Poland, Brookhaven National Laboratory USA, ETH Zurich Switzerland, IMEM Parma Italy, INFN Turino, Italy, CMU Pittsburgh USA, Belle II KEK Japan etc.



Digital Humanities
Events Organised:
• DH Lecture Series: Digital Humanities, IDRP in collaboration with Christ University (Lavasa) organised a lecture series
from October 2024-November 2024. The lecture series explored developments within the field of Digital Humanities
and fostered interdisciplinary dialogue among scholars and practitioners.
• DH-DHARTI conference 2024: Digital Humanities division also hosted the DHARTI (Digital Humanities Alliance for
Research and Teaching Innovations) Biennial conference from 10-13 December, 2024. The conference was sponsored by
GALE and had plenary sessions by renowned DH scholars from both, India and abroad.
We invited nine plenary speakers for the conference. Prof. Nirmala Menon, IIT Indore, Dr. Vinayak Dasgupta, Shiv
Nadar University, Dr. Shanmugapriya, IIT Dhanbad, Dr. Mayurakshi Chaudhuri, Flame University, Dr. Maya Dodd,
Flame University, and Dr. Souvik Mukherjee, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences delivered plenary talks during the
conference. We also had three international plenary speakers: Prof. Leonardo Flores, Appalachian State University, Dr.
Dibyadyuti Roy, Leeds University and Dr. Setsuko Yokoyama, Singapore University of Technology.
• The conference witnessed many fascinating papers presented by young research scholars as well as established voices
within the field of Digital Humanities in India and abroad. GALE group conducted a workshop during the conference
in which Mr. Mark Richardson spoke on ‘Introduction to Gale, digitisation and Gale as infrastructure.’ Mr. Chris
Houghton spoke on the topic ‘Building Sustainable Ecosystems: Using Gale to support Indian Digital Humanities
Infrastructure,’ and Ms. Mickey Mehta provided a demo on Gale databases. During the conference, significant
workshops were also organised such as a workshop on QGIS software and a workshop by MaTra Lab for analysing
multilingual audiovisual data.
• This is one of the first international conferences hosted by Digital Humanities, IDRP division, and it provided a lot of
visibility to the Digital Humanities programme at IIT Jodhpur.
Student Achievements:
• Sabeela Rasheed- Paper presentation. International Conference on ‘Digital Humanities and AI - Intersections,
Innovations, and Implications' at IIT (ISM) Dhanbad (31/01/25 - 01/02/25). Title of the Paper: ‘Artificial Intelligence
and Cyberprotest: The Role of Deepfakes in Shaping Digital Discourse.’
• Pratishruti Bandyopadhyay - Paper presentation. International Conference on ‘Digital Humanities and AI -
Intersections, Innovations, and Implications at IIT (ISM) Dhanbad (31/01/25 - 01/02/25). Title of the Paper:
‘Posthumanism and Identity in Titane : Gender, Technology and the Cyborg Body'
• Yokoyama, Setsuko; Ghosh, Sharanya; Dahiya, Vasundhra; Dahiya, Lavanya; Chadha, Aanya; Banerjee, Romi, Why
do they say DH is the best of both worlds? Navigating DH futures at engineering schools in postcolonial Asia -- ADHO
Digital Humanities Conference 2024: Reinvention & Responsibility
• Pankhuri Gupta was awarded a competitive bursary by the University of Oxford to attend the Digital Humanities,
Oxford Summer School 2025.
• Mehak Sejwal: Online Paper Presentation - “Ancient Scripts, Modern Methods: Analysing the Ashokan Edicts” in the
4th DARIAH-HR International Conference in Split, Croatia. October 9-11, 2024
▪ Paper Presentation - “Evolution of the Image of Rāma from Temples to Metaverse” in the 32nd Session of the
Indian Art History Congress, ‘Rendering of Indian Epics in Art and Culture’ February 8 to 10, 2025
• Supreet Kaur: Supreet Kaur, Santanu Chaudhury, and Rajendra Nagar
▪ Paper Presentation at DH2024: Reinvention & Responsibility; Paper Title – Preserving Crafts and Knowledge from
the Physical World to the Digital World



Center for AIOT and Applications
The Internet of Things (IoT) has captured significant interest across various sectors, including smart
agriculture, transportation, environmental monitoring, smart cities, smart grid, autonomous vehicles,
healthcare, and industrial applications. Central to IoT functionality are sensors that need to be both highly
sensitive and selective to effectively interact with their environment. Furthermore, the data these sensors collect
is essential for enhancing the intelligence of processes and systems. IoT encompasses a broad range of disciplines,
from material science to data analytics, all vital for developing IoT systems. To address these complex needs,
an Inter-Disciplinary Research Platform (IDRP) has been established for the Center for AIOT and
Applications. This platform aims to integrate technologies comprehensively, fostering research and
development across sectors like Industry 4.0, health, and infrastructure, which includes safety and environmental
monitoring. The collaborative R&D ecosystem in Jodhpur, which brings together institutions like IITJ, AIIMS,
NLU, and Police University, is poised to drive innovation in AIOT in areas such as healthcare, environment, and
cybersecurity.
Figure 1: Internet of Things (IoT) and its applications
The infographic( Shown in Figure 1) depicts various aspects of the Internet of Things (IoT) and its
applications across multiple domains. On the left side, key technological components are listed, such as Sensors,
Communication, Computing, AI/ML, AR/VR, Security, and Energy Harvesting. The center of the image displays
specific application areas, categorized into Manufacturing, Energy, Mobility, Healthcare, Infrastructure,
Logistics, Living, and Agriculture, with examples like Industry 4.0, Smart Grid, Intelligent Mobility, and
Precision Agriculture. On the right, the outcomes or benefits of IoT integration are shown, including
Intelligence, Efficiency, Connectivity, Transparency, and Flexibility. This layout illustrates how foundational
technologies enable diverse applications, which in turn generate various beneficial outcomes. 


Quantum Information & Computation (QIC)
Over the last century, Quantum Mechanics has emerged as a fundamental ingredient for understanding various
facets of nature such as atomic and sub-atomic physics, quantum optics, and a plethora of phenomena in condensed
matter physics. Modern developments in computing could be said to have started from the work of Alan Turing,
while information theory was put on the pedestal of modern science by the efforts of Claude Shannon. The
amalgamation of quantum physics with computing and information theory could be historically traced from the
works of EPR (Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen), followed by that of John Bell and culminating in efforts made by
Charles Bennett. This was further cemented by the efforts of William Wootters. In the last three decades, the world
has witnessed enormous progress on the theoretical front to investigate the foundations of quantum information,
and to analyze the potentials offered by entanglement and nonlocal correlations towards computing. The ongoing
debates, studies, and creative intellect paved the way for a new computing paradigm with a promise of speed-up,
efficiency, and enhanced security. In fact, the experimental developments over the last few decades have brought
the subject of quantum information and computation to the threshold of technology development.
Handling, manipulating, and processing quantum information require control and protection of nonlocal correlations
over quantum channels. The fragile nature of these correlations coupled with uncontrollable interactions with
surroundings make the problem of scalability exponentially challenging. The increase in technological difficulties with
the increase in the number of qubits should not be surprising considering that complexity is the characteristic trait of
the theory in place. In fact, it is the complexity and potential therein that motivate academicians, industries, and
entrepreneurs to invest in the intellect and generate funding to resolve theoretical and technological challenges.
Apart from academia across the globe, tech giants such as IBM, Google, Microsoft, D-Wave, Intel, Regetti,
QuintessenceLabs, Hewlett Packard, Ion Q, Cambridge quantum computing Quantum Biosystems, and many more
are addressing the issues related to control, gate fidelity and scalability- quantum error correction. Moreover, the
Government of India has taken cognizance of the area and initiated a new research program on Quantum Enabled
Science & Technology (QuEST), and in a similar way, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
(MeitY) has taken various initiatives.



Welcome To The School of Design
The School of Design at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur welcomes you into its esteemed community of creative minds and problem solvers. While you embark on this creative journey, prepare to engage in dynamic discourse, challenge paradigms, and collaborate with faculty and peers, forging new frontiers in design and its application.

We have been inspired by a collective vision to establish a school that goes beyond conventional problem-solving through design, fostering a culture of innovation, sustainability, and consultancy. We aim to create an ecosystem where creativity converges with purpose, giving rise to groundbreaking design solutions that address contemporary challenges.



Welcome to The School of Liberal Arts

Vision
The vision of the School of Liberal Arts is to emerge as a forerunner in Liberal Arts education. We believe in a novel, open, futuristic, trans-disciplinary, and inclusive liberal humanist approach, that not only engages with the human, the non-human, and the planetary, but also recognizes and amplifies the diverse possibilities and potentials of human-technology interfaces as both agents and sites for social change’ (SoLA Vision Document, Annexure 1, pg. 17). The SoLA will have a broader vision, seeking to break the silos created by disciplinary boundaries and reimagining the educational structure. Through an open approach it will strive to equip and enable students for the challenge of the future, while turning them into global citizens and able thinkers with an awareness of the needs and demands of contemporary society. The goals of SoLA will include:

To engage in foundational as well as socially relevant and benevolent research in the areas of Liberal Arts, to aid and guide the technologies developed to bring solutions for constructive
Read More
Mission
The SoLA at IIT Jodhpur has been founded on the principles that quality education in the Liberal Arts is a primary requisite for solving the multidimensional challenges that our current and future generations face. In operationalizing this core principle, the research, pedagogy, and outreach at the SoLA will be life-cantered with a particular emphasis on recognizing and amplifying disciplinary intersections in the Creative Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences, Natural Sciences and Technologies. To achieve this goal, the SoLA will have the following objectives:

Message From The Head

The School of Liberal Arts (SoLA) at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2022, evolved from the Department of Humanities and Social Sciences (HSS), which had its inception in the year 2015. This is a critical milestone for a young department and represents our consistent improvement in academics and research. In accordance with the future-driven vision of IIT Jodhpur, the change in name signifies a change in orientation. The newly established School promotes the idea of transformation by breaking the traditional silos, and through multidisciplinary, transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary means, making an active intervention that will strengthen the existing research ecosystem of the institute.

Through the courses and programs offered by our School, we encourage students to become professionals whose practice and research bridge the gaps between the humanistic, the social, the environmental, and the technological domains. SoLA’s flagship program is the two-year MSc in Computational Social Sciences (CSS) with a specialization in two tracks – Computational Economics and Computational Sociology.

To promote a more nuanced dialogue between STEM and social sciences, the school also offers interdisciplinary cross-institute courses for engineering students at undergraduate, graduate and doctoral levels.

The faculty of our school are distinguished academics, with rich intellectual capital who combine academic excellence with pedagogical innovations that represent their dedication and commitment to the vision of the School and IIT Jodhpur.

I invite you to learn more about our School and to be part of our journey as we foster humanitarian values, diversity, inclusiveness, a passion for learning and building a culture of excellence in education and research.


Welcome to School of Management & Entrepreneurship
The School of Management and Entrepreneurship (SME) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur is a dynamic and forward-thinking school that offers a distinctive blend of technology-driven management education. Established with the aim of integrating technological advancements into the world of business, SME is designed to equip students with the skills needed to navigate the rapidly changing business landscape. At the heart of SME IIT Jodhpur is a strong emphasis on interdisciplinary education, combining the best of both management and technology. The school offers a unique MBA Technology program that goes beyond traditional business education by incorporating a deep understanding of modern technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), data science, blockchain, and digital transformation. This approach ensures that students are well-prepared to face the challenges of a business world increasingly shaped by technological disruptions. The MBA curriculum covers essential management subjects such as operations, marketing, strategy, finance, entrepreneurship, and human resources, while simultaneously introducing students to cutting-edge technological concepts and their applications in business.

One of the unique aspects of the SME is its focus on practical, project-based learning. We encourages students to work on real-world problems, engaging with live projects, case studies, and industry collaborations to apply their knowledge. This hands-on approach not only helps in developing critical thinking skills but also prepares students for the complex problem-solving tasks they will encounter in their professional careers. The experiential learning process is further enhanced by opportunities to collaborate with industry leaders, ensuring that students are attuned to the latest trends and challenges in the business world. The school places a strong emphasis on innovation and entrepreneurship, recognizing the growing importance of these areas in today’s economy. SME IIT Jodhpur provides students with various platforms to develop their entrepreneurial ideas, including access to incubators, innovation labs, and mentorship from experienced entrepreneurs and industry professionals. By providing the necessary resources and guidance, SME helps budding entrepreneurs transform their ideas into viable business ventures.

The faculty at SME IIT Jodhpur consists of experienced professionals and academics with a strong background in both teaching and industry practice. Faculty members at the school are involved in cutting-edge research in areas like digital transformation, innovation ecosystems, human capital management, neuro-marketing, and entrepreneurship in social and community settings. The faculty’s diverse experience allows them to bring fresh perspectives into the classroom, while their ongoing research keeps them at the forefront of current business trends and technological advancements.

By combining core management principles with a strong focus on technology and innovation, SME prepares its students to become leaders in the evolving business world. The emphasis on experiential learning, entrepreneurship, and interdisciplinary research makes SME an ideal destination for those looking to excel in fields where technology, business, and society intersect. With a commitment to shaping future leaders who are not only proficient in management but also driven by innovation and ethical leadership, SME IIT Jodhpur is establishing itself as a premier school in the realm of business education in India.



Welcome to the Engineering Science
Message from Chairperson (ES Undergratuate Commitee)

Engineering applications generally require multidisciplinary knowledge, spanning across various disciplines of engineering and sciences. Knowledge in humanities along with engineering and/ or sciences are also finding important applications. B.Tech. in Engineering Sciences (ES) is a unique bachelors degree program of IIT Jodhpur which aim to impart core knowledge in two targeted focus areas in Science and Engineering, to meet demands of emerging industrial and academic requirements.

Any student admitted to IIT Jodhpur can opt for B.Tech. in Engineering science post 1st year. Students will be required to complete core courses of ES, in the first two years of study whereas they can outline their own curriculum, in the guidance of faculty advisor, in the form of electives for the remaining two years, from courses across disciplines of engineering, science, and humanities. In line with regular B.Tech. programs, students can also use 10 credits out of stipulated electives and 10 additional credits to earn minor/ specialization as an add-on to the B.Tech. degree. The flexibility of curriculum selection, as per students’ capabilities and interest with faculty guidance, aims to impartsufficient knowledge to the students, to be future ready professionals.

Institute Background and Vision

Innovations, Scientific Discoveries, and New Technologies are the essential foundations of the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. The institute focuseson building solid and in-depth knowledge in the engineering domains and strongly encourages interdisciplinary learning. The courses offered are defined such that it enhances the imagination and creativity of the students to identify and solve new problems in society. Our endeavour is to build an atmosphere for uninhibited ideas.The institute offers 9 B.Tech programs: Computer Science & Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Engineering Sciences, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Mechanical Engineering, Bioengineering, Materials Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Civil and Infrastructure Engineering.The institute also empowers students by allowing them to avail specializations, minors, and elective courses.

Program Background

Engineering Science is a unique branch of engineering designed to cater to the upcoming demand of the industry and research, training the best of students to have a strong foundation in every field along with a specialization in their topic of interest. Our institute is one of the primary institutes offering an Engineering Science program. This programme is a four-year course. The first two years are devoted to topics which we believe all Engineering undergraduates should study. In the third and fourth years, the students have the opportunity to study any two complementary disciplines by drafting their own course structure. This fosters multi-disciplinary thinking and integrated application of engineering, scientific and mathematical principles in young students. The students can specialise/minor in any field as well.



Welcome To The Digital Infrastructure & Automation/Computer Center
The Digital Infrastructure & Automation (DIA) commonly known as Computer Center of the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur stands as a testament to the institution’s commitment to cutting-edge research, innovation, and technological development. As a pivotal hub for computing and information technology, the Computer Center has played a crucial role in shaping the academic landscape and the advancement of the institute. Since its inception, the Computer Center has undergone remarkable development and growth, aligning itself with advancements in the field of computing. Equipped with state-of-the-art infrastructure and a team of highly skilled professionals, the center has fostered an environment conducive to research and learning.



